1	[I. Prologue]
When wicked spirits were gathered together, intending to send devils into the hearts of men, to the intent they would destroy all things profitable for mankind, and to corrupt all the whole world, even to the uttermost of their power, sowing hypocrise and envy, and rooting bishops and prelates in pride, even the pope himself and his cardinals, which gathering themselves together said one to another as here follows:
The health which the Lord has given his people is now through magic and negromancy turned into the damnation of all people. For even the magians themselves, being intoxicated and blinded by the devil, and contrary to the order of Christ's Church, and transgressing the commandment of God, which says, "Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God, but him only shalt thou serve."
But these negromancers or magians, denying the sacrifice due to God, and in tempting him have done sacrifice to devils, and abused His Name in calling of them, contrary to the profession made at there baptism,
for there it is said, "Forsake the devil and all his pomps." But these magians and negromancers do not follow only the pomps and works of Satan, but have also brought all people through their marvellous illusions into the errors, drawing the ignorant and such like into the damnation both of soul and body, and they thinking this for no other purpose but that by this they should destroy all other sciences.
It is thought meet [=proper] therefore to pluck up and utterly to destroy this deadly root, and all the followers of this art, but they through the instigation of the devil, and being moved with envy and covetousness under the similitude of truth, they did publish and spread abroad the falsehood, speaking false and unlikely things. For it is not possible that a wicked and unclean man should work truely in this art, for men are not bound to spirits, but the spirits are constrained against their wills to answer men that are cleansed or clean, and to fulfill their requests. Yet against all those wills we have gone about to set forth the principles of this art,
and the cause of truth, and for that cause thay had condemned this art and judged us to death.
We therefore, through God's sufferance, having a foreknowledge of that judgement, knowing also that by it should follow much mischief, and that it was impossible to us to escape the hands of the people by our own strength without the help of spirits, doubting [i.e. fearing] that a greater danger would follow upon it, for the wicked power of the spirits at our command could have destroyed them [i.e. those who condemned us] all utterly in an hour.
Wherefore, we called a general council of all the masters. And out of the which council of 811 [*89]1masters which came out of Naples, Athens, and Toledo, we did choose one whose name was Honorius, the son of Euclid, master of the Thebians, in the which city this art was read, that he should work for us in this said art. And he through the council of a certain angel whose name was Hocroel, did write seven volumes of art magic, giving to us the kernel, and to others the shells. Out of the which books he drew out 93 chapters, in the which is briefly contained
the effect of this art, of the which chapters he made a book which we do call The Sacred or Sworn Book for this cause, for in it is contained the 100 sacred names of God, and therefor it is called sacred, as you would say "made of holy things," or else because by this book he came to the knowledge of sacred or holy things, or else because it was consecrated by angels, or else because the angel Hocroel did declare and show him that it was consecrated of God.
[The oath]
Then the princes and prelates being pacified with burning of certain fables or trifles, thought verily that this art had been utterly destroyed, and therefore we being somewhat moved, made this oath among ourselves:
•	First, that this book should be delivered to no man until such time as the master of the art were in jeopardy of death, and
•	That it should be copied but to three at the most, and
•	That it should be delivered to no woman, nor to any man except he were of lawful age, and he should also be both Godly and faithful, whose Godly behavior had been tried for the space of a whole year, and
•	That this book should no more hereafter be destroyed, but that it should be restored again to the honor, or to his successors, and
•	If there cannot be found an able and a sufficient man to whom this booke might be delivered, that then the master bind his executors by a strong oath to bury it with him in his grave, or else he shall himself while he lives bury it himself in some place honestly and cleanly, and never after to reveal the place by any circumstances to any creature, and
•	If the master shall have nide of any scholars or will prove them any manner of ways that for to fulfill his commandments if need be, they shall even suffer death rather than they will declare either the sayings or doings of their master, or that he knows any such things, nor declares any such thing by any man of circumstances. And like as a father causes one of his sons to love another, even so does the master unite and knit together his disciples or scholars in concord and love, so that always the one shall help to bear the others burden, nor one shall not reveal the secrets of another, but they shall be faithful of one mind and concord, and he that he shall truely perform, observe, and keep every article of his oath.
And for this cause this [book] is called The Sworn Book.
End of prologue.
________________________________________
2	[II. Contents]1
In the name of the almighty God, our Lord Jesus Christ, the true living God. I Honorius have thus appointed in my book the works of Solomon. I have first appointed the chapters that it may be the more plain.
Here begins the chapters of the first work.
1.	The first chapter is of the composition of the great name of God, which the Hebrews call Schemhamphoras which consists of seventy-two letters: h. t. o. e. x. o. r. a. b. a. l. a. y. q. c. l. y. s. t. a. l. g. a. a. o. w. o. s. v. l. a. r. y. t. c. e. k. r. p. f. y. o. m. e. m. a. n. a. r. e. l. a. t. e. v. a. t. o. n. o. n. a. o. y. l. e. o. t. s. y. n. a.,2 which is the beginning in this art.
2.	The second chapter is of the vision of the Deity,
3.	The third of the knowledge of the devine power,
4.	The fourth of the forgiveness of sins,
5.	The fifth that a man should not fall into deadly sin,
6.	The sixth of the redemption of three souls out of Purgatory.
The chapters of the second worke.
7.	The seventh chapter is of the knowledge of the heavens,
8.	To know the angels of every heaven
9.	To know every angel, his name, and his power,
10.	To know the seals of every angel,
11.	To know under whom every angel is,
12.	To know the office of every angel,
13.	Of the invocation of every angel and of his company,
14.	How a man should obtain his will by every angel,
15.	To obtain all sciences,
16.	To know the hour of death,
17.	To know all things present, past, and to come,
18.	To know the planets and the stars,
19.	To know the virtue of the planets and stars, and their influences,
20.	To alter or change the influence of the planets and stars,
21.	To change the day into night, and the night into the day,
22.	To know the spirits of the air,
23.	To know the spirits of the fire, and their names and their superiors, their seals, power, and virtue,
24.	The twenty-fourth, to know the names and the powers of the higher spirits,
25.	To know their seals,
26.	To know the alteration and changing of the elements, and of the bodies that be mixed of them,
27.	To know all herbs, plants, and beasts being upon the Earth, and of their virtues,
28.	The knowledge of the nature of man and of all his deeds and his thoughts,
29.	To know the spirits of the water, and there virtues, and their superiors,
30.	To know the earthly spirits and infernals,
31.	Of the sight of purgatory, and hell, and the souls their being,
32.	Of the bond or obligation that the soul and body shall return again,
33.	Of the consecrating of this book
End of the chapters of the second work.
The chapters of the third work.
34.	Of the constrinksyon of spirits by words,
35.	Of the consthinksyon of sprits by seals,
36.	Of the constrinckesyon of spirits by tables,*
37.	To give every spirit his shape,
38.	Of enclosing of spirits,*
39.	Of a spirit that is enclosed, that he may answer or not,*
40.	To cause thunder and lightening,
41.	Of burning to be made,
42.	Of the purging of the air,
43.	Of the corruption of the air,
44.	To cause snow and ice,
45.	Of dews [and] rain,
46.	To cause flowers and fruits,
47.	To go invisible,
48.	Of a horse [which will carry you anywhere you wish in a single night],**
49.	To bring again a man that is gone safe in an hour,
50.	To have a thing carried where you will in a moment,
51.	To take away a thing,
52.	To bring a thing again,
53.	To change the shape of every thing,
54.	To make a flood in a dry ground,
55.	To make a commotion at your pleasure,
56.	To destroy a kingdom or an empire,
57.	To have power over every man,
58.	To have a thousand armed men,
59.	To form a castle that shall never be destroyed,*
60.	To make a wicked glass,*
61.	To destroy a place or a hold by a wicked glass,*
62.	Of a glass wherein you shall see the whole world,*
63.	To bring again that which a thief has stollen,
64.	To open locks,
65.	To cause discord and debate,
66.	To cause unity and concord,
67.	To have the favor of everybody,
68.	To obtain or get riches,
69.	[To have the desire of women.]**
70.	To heal all man of diseases,
71.	To cast into sickness whom you will,
72.	To kill whom you will,
73.	To cause [*hold back] danger, both by sea and land,
74.	To delay a ship that is stopped in the sea by the adamant stone,
75.	To avoid all man of dangers,
76.	To gather birds together, and to take them,
77.	To gather fishes together and to take them,*
78.	To gather wild [and domestic] beasts together and to take them,*
79.	To cause war amongst fishes, [people]** fouls, and such like,*
80.	To make burning to appear,
81.	To make jugglers or maidens singing to appear,
82.	To make gardens or castles to appear,
83.	To make fighting men to appear,*
84.	To make gryphons and dragons to appear,
85.	To make all wild beasts to appear,
86.	To make hunters and their dogs to appear hunting,
87.	To make a man to think he is in a place where he is not,*
88.	To make all pleasures to appear.*
End of the chapters of the third work.
The chapters of the fourth work.
88.	To deliver them that be in prison,
89.	To lock again the gates of the castle,1
90.	To have all treasures metals, precious stones, and all other thinges hidden in the ground,
91.	Of the appearing of dead bodies that they seem to arise again and to speak,
92.	That you should think beasts to appear created againe of the earth
But these two chapters have we taken away, because they be against the will of God.
Thus ends the notes of all the chapters.
________________________________________
3	[III.] Here begins the book.
________________________________________
We therefore, through God's help, intending to follow the steps and precepts of Solomon, therefore to your receiving of such a high mystery, we profess to be one chief principal or beginning. Note therefore that the first and chief principal or beginning is the Divine Majesty, and the true invocation must come from the very faith of the heart, the which faith the works shall declare. For Solomon said there is one only God, one might or power, one faith, of whom one work, one principal or beginning, and of whom the perfection and effect of every work comes, although this be divided into many parts. For like as all the whole parts do savour and smell of the body, even so likewise of these things come all perfection and effect.
In the name therefore of the true and living God, who is Alpha and Omega the beginning and the ending, which is the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, three persons and one God, the giver of life, and the destroyer of death. For he destroyed our death and through his resurrection restored us again to life.
Of the making of the Seal of God, for the knowledge of the first part, of the knowledge of the Deity, for the knowledge of the second part, in the third part of the vision of angels, the fourth of the constrinkesyon, the fifth part of the bonds of dead men.2
Of angels there are three kinds. Some are celestial, some are of the air, and some are of the earth. Of the celestial, there are also two kinds. Some of them serve God only, and those are the nine orders of angels, that is to say, cherubin, seraphin, thrones, dominations, virtues, principates, potestates, archangels, and angels. Of whom it is to be spoken among mortal men, for they will not be constrained by any artificial power. And therefore they ought not be invocated, for they always stand before the Divine Majesty, and are never separated from His presence. Yet because the soul of man was created with them, and to there likeness, looking to be rewarded with them may through the gift and grace of God, his body yet living behold the Divine Majesty, and with them to praise and to know God the creator, and this knowledge is not to know God in his majesty and power, but ever as Adam and the prophets did know him.
But this is principally to be noted, that there are three kinds of men that work in this art: Jews, Christians, and pagans. The pagans do sacrifice to the spirits of the air and of the earth, but they do not constrain or bind them, but the spirits do fain themselves to be bound by the words of their law, to the intent they may make them commit idolatry, and never turn to the true faith. And because their faith is nought, therefore their works are nought. He that will work after that man must forsake the living God, and must do sacrifice to spirits and idols. For it is faith that works in a man good or evil. Wherefore it is said in the Gospel, "your faith has made you safe."
The Jews do in no wise work to obtain the vision of the Deity, for by the coming of Christ they lost their preeminence, nor can they come to heaven, for the Lord says, he that is not baptized shall be damned. And so in all angels they work imperfectly. Nor can they through their invocations bring any work to effect, except they believe in Christ. For it is said by the prophet, "when the king of kings and the Lord of Lords is come, then shall your annointing cease," which should never have ceased if they could have wrought effectually by this art. And so theire works are nought. And although the Jews in that they are Jews are condemned, of yet they do worship the High Creator, but not after a due sort. Yet through the power of the holy names of God, spirits are constrained to come. But Jews because they are not signed with the sign of God, that is to say with the sign of the cross, therefore those spirits will not answer them truely.
Therefore, the Christian man only works truely to come to the vision of the Deity, and in all other works. And although three sorts of men do work by this art magic, yet it is not to be thought that there is any evil in this name Magian, for this same name Magian signifies in the Greek tongue a philosopher, and in the Hebrew tongue a scribe,and in the Latin tongue it signifies wise. And so this name of art magic is compounded of this word magos which is as much to say as 'wise,' and of ycos which by interpretation is 'knowledge.' For by it a man is made wise. For by this art a man may know things present, past, and to come.
4	[IV.] Here follows the making of the Seal of the true and living God
First, make a circle with a diameter of three fingers, on account of the Lord's three nails, or five on account of the five wounds, or seven on account of the seven sacraments, or nine on account of the nine orders of angels, but generally five fingers are customary.
Then, below that circle make another circle, distant from the first by two barley grains (on account of the two Tablets of Moses), else the distance from the first can be three grains (on account of the three persons in the Trinity.)
Then below those two circles in the uppermost part, which is called the southern angle, make a single cross, the leg of which may slightly enter the innermost circle.
Then, from the right side of the cross, write .h. (the "exalation"), then .t., then .o. then .e. x . o. r. a. b. a. l. a. y. q. c. i. y. s. t. a. l. g. a. a. o. n. o. s. v. l. a. r [t]. y. t. c. e. k. s. p. f. y. o. m. e. m. a. n. a. r. e. l. a. c. e. d. a. t. o. n. o. n. a. o. y. l. e. [y]. o. t. m. a.1 and these letters may be made an equal distance apart, and may surround the circle. And with that series of letters which was previously named the circle will thus be filled with the great name of the Lord,Schemhamphoras, of 72 letters.
This done, in the middle of the circles, namely in the center, make a pentagram thus:
 
in the middle of which should be the sign 'Tau', thus:  , and above that sign, write the name of God El, and underneath this another name of God, namely, Ely, in this fashion:
 .
Then, below the uppermost angle of the pentagram, write these two letters: .l.x. 
And below the other in the right angle, these two: .a.l. 
and in the next after those, these two: .l.a. 
and in the next after that: .l.c. 
and in that following: .u.m.
Then, around the pentagram make a heptagon; it may touch the uppermost side of the pentagram, <its second> which is after the middlemost top angle, where are written.l.x.
And in the same side of the heptagon write this name of the holy angel, which is Casziel. 
And in the next side from the right-most, the name of the holy angel, which is Satquiel. 
Then in the next Samael, and in the next Raphael, afterwards Anael, afterwards Michael, followed by Gabriel. And thus the seven sides of the heptagon will be completed.
Then, around that preceding heptagon, make another heptagon, not made like the first, but in such a manner that the one side of it will intersect the previous side of the same.
Then make another such heptagon, like the first, whose seven angles touch the seven angles of the second heptagon, and the which should be shown doubled.
<Yet here, the heptagon under the preceding second will be contained,> unum latus secundi heptagoni supernudo et aliud subenudo, sed latus primo angulo succedens subenudo ibit. et quae sequntur serie supereuntis et subeuntis alterutrum se habebunt.
Then, in each of the angles of the second heptagon make a cross.
Then, in that side (of the second heptagon) which goes from the last angle to the second angle of the same, in that part which is above the first syllable of Casziel, this syllable from a sacred name of God should be written: la, and above the last syllable of the same (Casziel) should be written this syllable: ya, and in the space [between] the intersection and the second cross should be written the syllable ly.
Then, in that side which extends from the first angle of the second heptagon, and continues to the third angle of the same, this holy name of God should be written: Narath, and the first syllable, Na should be written in that space of the same side which is above the first syllable of Satquiel, and the syllable Ra in the space which is above the last syllable of the same, and the two letters 't,' 'h' made in that place which is in the same side between the side intersecting itself and the third cross.
Then, in that side (of the same second heptagon) which extends from the third angle of the same to the fifth of the same, should be written this holy name of the Creator, which is called Libarre, such that the syllable Ly is written above the first syllable of Raphael, and the syllablebar is over the last syllable of the same, and the syllable rein that space of the same side which is between the side intersecting itself and the fifth angle of the same second heptagon.
Then, in that side (of the same second heptagon) which is farthest from the fifth cross, this other sacred name of the Creator should be written: Libares, such that the syllable Ly is written in that space of the side which is above the first syllable of Michael, and the syllable ba in that space of the side which is above the last syllable of the same (Michael), and the syllable res in that space of the same side which is between the side intersecting itself and the last cross.
Then, in that side (of the same second heptagon) which goes from the second angle (of the same second heptagon) to the fourth, this other holy name should be written: Lialg cum coniunctiua ita quod coniunctiua in illo loco eiusdem lateris scribatur which is above the first syllable of Samael and this syllable ly in that space of the same side which is above the last syllable of the same (Samael), and this syllable alg in that place of the same side which is between the side intersecting itself and the fourth cross.
But beware that the coniunctiua (connective) should be written thus: [figure] with the inscription intersecting, because of the fear of God malum volitum dividentem.
Then, on that side (of the same heptagon) that goes from the fourth cross to the sixth, write this other sacred name of God: Ueham, such that the syllable ve is written above the first syllable of Anael, and the letter h is above the last syllable of the same, and the syllable am is in the space of the same side which is [inter]secting the side itself and the sixth cross.
Then on that side which goes from the sixth angle (of the same second heptagon) to the first angle, this other sacred name of God should be written: yalgal, such that the letter y is written in the space of the same side which is above the first syllable of Gabriel, and the syllable al is above the last, and the syllable gal should be written in the space of the same side which is between the intersection and the first cross.
Then, in the middle of the first side and the third heptagon, to the right, should be written vos, and in the next place Duymas, and in the next Gyram, and in the next Gram, andin the next Aysaram, and in the next Alpha, and in the next  .
Then, in that small space which is under the second and the third angle of the first heptagon, should be written this name of God: el,
and in that small space which is to the right under the second and third angles of the heptagons under the second cross, this name: ON,
and in the next space under the third cross, again this name:el,
and in the next under the fourth cross, again: ON,
and in the next under the fifth cross, again: el,
and in the next under the sixth cross, again: ON,
and in the next under the seventh cross:  .
Then in that small space which is enclosed between the first angle of the second heptagon and the second angle of the same, and the first side of the third heptagon, and the part touching those angles of the circle, draw a single cross in the middle, namely in that space. And in the top-left space of the cross, write the letter: a,
and in the top-right space of the cross this letter: g,
and in the lower-right space write another letter: a,
and in the fourth lower space this other letter: l.
Then in the middle of the next small space to the right, write this name of God: Ely, 
and in the next, this name: Eloy, 
and in the next: Christos, 
and in the next: Sother, 
and in the next: ADONAI, 
and in the next: Saday.
After this you shall know that commonly in the exemplars the five-cornered star or amulet is made of red, with the space within dyed saffron [yellow], and the first seven-cornered star of azure, the second of saffron, the third of purple, and the round circle of Black.
And the space between the circles where the name Schemhamphoras is, is died with saffron. At other spaces are to be coloured with green.
<Where Tetragrammaton ye & the circle about that white, with the angels names and planets.>
But in operations it must otherwise be done. For it is made with the blood either of a mole or of a turtledove, or a lapwing, or of a bat, or of them all, and in virgin parchment of a calf, or of foal, or a hind calf [i.e. deer]. And so is the Seal of God perfect.
And by this holy and consecrated seal after it is consecrated, you may work operations which shall be declared afterwards in this book. The manner of consecrating of this holy seal ought thus to be as followeth.
 
By the inspiration of God, Solomon said: there is only one God, one faith, and one virtue, which the Lord intended to be revealed to men and distributed of this wise. The angel [Samael] said to Solomon, "This shall you give to the people of Israel who also shall likewise give to others. So it has pleased the creator."
And the Lord commands it thus to be consecrated: § First, let the worker be clean, not polluted, and let him do it with devotion, not deceytfully. § Let him not eat nor drink till he has done his work. § And the blood wherewith it shall be written, first must be blessed as shall be said afterward. Then the seal must be [per]fumed with amber, musk, aloes, lapdanum, white and red mastick, olibanum margarith [i.e. pearls], and frankincense, calling upon and praying to the Lord and all holy angels, by saying as follows:
Oration.
"That you, O Lord, through the annunciation, the conception" etc.1 "that you would deign to bless and consecrate this most holy name and your seal, so that through it with your mediation, I or such person N, will be able to conquer such heavenly powers, of the air or earth, with the infernal ones, to subjugate, invoke, transmute, conjure, constrain, arouse, congregate, disperse, bind and return them without harm. To appease people and favourably obtain from them their petitions, to pacify enemies, to disunite those pacified, to protect the health of those who are healthy, or to sicken them, and to cure the sick. To guard good people from evil, and to distinguish and recognised them, to evade all physical danger, to make favourable judges be favourably disposed again, to have victory in all things, to destroy carnal sins, and rout, conquer, and rout spiritual ones, to increase wealth in good things, and on the Day of Judgement that I may appear on your right hand with your saints and elect, and be able to recognise your majesty.”
Then that night let him lay it without the house in the clear air. Then you shall have new gloves made without fingers thereon [perhaps better: without whitening with chalk], into the which no man ever did put his hand, in the which the seal shall be fast put and thus is accomplished this holy [*consecrated] seal [whose first heptagon designates the seven orders, whose second designates the seven twofold events, and whose third designates the seven sacraments.]
5	[V.] The beginning of the cleansing or purging of him who shall work in this art, for he must be clean from all filthiness of soul and body.

Now that we have finished the composition or making of the Seal of God, let us proceed to know how we shall obtain the vision or sight of the Deity.
First he that shall work must be very penitent and truly confessed of all his sins. He must utterly forbear the company of women and all their enticements, insomuch that he may not look upon them. For as Solomon says, "It is better to abide with a bear or a lion in their den than to be in a house with a wicked woman." He may keep no company with wicked or sinful men, for as David says, "With the holy you shall be holy, and with the wicked you shall be wicked." Therefore he must lead a pure and clean life. For David says, "blessed are the undefiled and those that walk in the law of the Lord." Let not his apparel be filthy, but rather new, or else very clean washed. Solomon means here by the new garments virtue and pureness of life, for God and his holy angels care for no worldly things, and that does appear (?). For the poor men do sooner work effectually in this art than the rich men. But in this work following clean apparel is necessary, for angels do abide with men and they be clean, and therefore they desire to have clean apparel. And therefore Salomon did speak generally both of the cleanness of the soul and of the cleanness of apparel. And let him that shall work never be idle, lest his heart do the sooner incline to sin. For the scripture says, "Be always doing something lest you be found idle." And let him always pray to God with these prayers following. For the scripture says, "blessed is the servant whom the Lord when he comes shall find waking." 
________________________________________
6	The suffumigations as here follows.
Thimmiamate for Saturday is all good things and well smelling roots such as costus and the herb thuris.
Thimiamate for Sunday is mastic, musk, and such like, and all other good gums of good odor, as thus, benjamin, storax, labdanum, amber armoniacum, and such like.
Thimiamate for Monday is folium mirti, and lawlri, and leaves of good odor of all sweet flowers.
Thimiamate for Tuesday is sanders, the red, black, and white, and all sweet woods as lignum aloes, cypress, balsam, and such like.
Thimiamate for Wednesday is the rinds of all sweete woods, as cinnamon, cassia ligina corticus, lauri, and macis, and all sweet seeds.
Thimiamate for Thursday is all sweet fruits as nutmeg, cloves, the rinds of oranges and citrines, dry and powdered with such like of good odor.
Thimiamate for Friday is mace, roses, violets, and all other fruits or flowers of good odor, as crocus and such like.
Hermes said of thimiamate, of the Moon is cinnamon, lignum aloes, mastic, crocus, costus, maces, and myrtle. We put this that each planet has a part in it.
Solomon, making a distinction upon the days and planets of the spice with which a man ought to make thimiamate, said that of Saturn is each good root in good and evil, of Jupiter all fruits, of Mars each tree, of Sol each gum, of Mercury each rind, of Venus each flower and odoriforus herb, of the Moon each leaf. Bacce, cardamonum wax, put also with these things.
Hermes says that he found in an old book that these were the more suffumigations: thimiamate grecum, mastic, sandalus, galbanum, muscharlazerat, myrrh, and amber, and these be the collections of spirits. And he says there is no such suffumigation to call spirits as is ambra, lignum aloes, costus muscus, crocus, and the blood of a lapwing, with thimiamate mixed all together in equal portions, so that it be odiferus of the gums.
Suffumigations compounded of certain thinges here follow, attributed to the planet.
For the Sun take saffron, amber, musk, lignum, aloes, lignum balsam, the fruit of laurel, with cloves, myrrh, and thuer equal portions, so that it is mixed all together after such manner that it be very sweet of odor of the gums aforesaid. Put to this the brains of an eagle and the blood of an white cock, such quantity as it may be very odiferous as before said. And make it into little balls or pills and keep it very closed from the air or wind for your use.
For the Moon take the heads of frogs made of the air, which you may gather after some showers of rain, with the eyes of a bull and the seed of white poppy with thure, and camphir, equal portions, mixed all together with sangine menstruo, and the blood of a white gander, such quantity as it may be very odiferus, and lay it safely up for your use as before said.
For Mars take euphorbium, bedellium, armoniacum, the roots of both the herbs called Helleborus (of some it is called bearfoot), with the powder of the stone called magnes, and myrrh, with a little sulphur, but of the other equall portions, mixed all together with the brains of a raven, and human bloode, with the blood of a black cat, such a quantity as it may be very odiferus, and lay it up for your use as before said.
For Mercury take mastic, thure, cloves, the herb called cinqfoil, and of the stone in powder called an agate, of equal portions, and mix all these together with the brains of a fox and of a weasle, with the blood of a pie called a hagester, such a quantity as shall be expedient, so that it be very odiferus of the goumies aforesaid, and lay it up safe for your use, as before is first written.
For the planet Jupiter take the seed of an ash tree, lignum aloes, storax, benjamen, and of the stone that is called lapis lazuli, and the great ends of the quills of a peacock, equal portions, and mix all these together with the blood of a stork, of a swallow, and the brains of stag called an hart, when he is killed in the presence of the prince, the male or female will serve, but take such a quantity as it may be very odiferus of the foresaid gums, and lay it up very well for your use as before said.
For the planet Venus, take musk, amber, lignum aloes, red roses, and of the stone in powder called coral, of that which is red, equal portions, and mix all these together with the brains of sparrows, male and female, and with the blood of a turtledove, or of a house dove being white, having always respect that it be odiforous of the goumies as aforementioned, and keep it very well for your use, ut supra(as above).
For the planet Saturn take the seed of black poppy, the seed of henbane, the root of mandrake, and of the stone in powder called magnes, and of myrrh, equal portions, mix all these together with the brains of a black cat, and the blood of backes called fluider mice [i.e. bats], having respect to the quantity that it be odiforous of the goumie afore specified, keeping it very well for your use as is first written. 
Here follows of marvellous efficacies of certain suffumigations according to the demonstration of learned and wise men after the opinion of philosophy.
A suffumigation made of these herbs as follows causes a man to see scecreate visions to foreshow and prognosticate hidden and secret mysteries concerning the whole use of the world, and to reveal and openly declare the qualities and operation thereof.
Take of seed of flex the seed of the herb called fleseed, the roots of violets, the roots of parsley, and make a fumigation according to the use as you shall be taught in this book, and you shall through the grace and help of almighty God have your desire. 
A suffumigation made of these herbs cause the visions in the air or elsewhere to appear
Take coriander of some called colender, and henbane, and the skin that is within the pomegranite. And the fumigation made, it is finished [=accomplished] that [which] you desire.
A suffumigation made of these herbs as follows causeths visions of the earth to appear
Take the root of the cane reed, and the root of giant fennil, which is called ferula, with the skin that is within the pourgarnet, and henbane, and the herb tassi barbassi, and red sanders, and black poppy. The confection of these made, it is finished that [which] you desire.
But if this herb parsley with the root of it be added to the foresaid confection, it destroys the forsaid matter, and makes it clean void from all places, and it shall come to no effect. 
A suffumigation made of these herbs as follows expels and drives away all visions, and fantasies in sleep or otherwise.
Take peonies, pennyroyal, mints and the herb called palmacrist, and make a confection thereof at your going to bed, or at any other time when as need requires, and it shall be done that [which] you require.
A suffumigation made as follows drives and expels all poisons and venoms.
Take the fumes of a peacock [feather, and] the hidden parts of the lungs of an ass, and make a confection thereof, and it is done that [which] you desire.
A suffumigation made as follows causes a house or such places where it is made to seem as it were full of water or blood.
Take the gall of the fish called a cuttle, the sweet gum called armoniac, and roses, and lignum aloes. If then the said confection be put in the place where any water of the sea has been, or any blood has been, or put [some] of the said water or blood into the said confection, that being congealed and dried, and thereof a fumigation made in a house or any place where you are disposed to prove this, and it shall be done that [which] you desire. And put into this place where you work this forsaide matter, the earth that falls or hangs on a plow, and it will seem that all the earth trembles and shakes.
A suffumigation made as hereafter follows in any place where you will, causes all things there hidden never to be found or revealed.
Take these herbs, coriander, and saffron, henbanne, parsley, and black poppy, the water thereof the poppy distilled and tempered with the juice of the poungarnet skin, the which is within the said poungarnet. This being in a confection made and lay with it gold, silver, or any other precious thing within the water, the earth, or any other place where you will, or make a fumigation of the foresaid confection upon the said place which you would hide anything in. The Moon at the same present [=instant] be[ing] in conjunction with the Sun in the fourth house, which is the angle of the earth, or the point of midnight, and it shall be always kept secret, for being found or revealed by any way or means, it is certain and true.
A suffumigation made of, as after follows, causes visions in the air and the shaddows of sepulchers of the earth to appear.
Take the natural seed of the fish called a whale, lignum aloes, costus, musk, saffron, armoniac, with the blood of the foul called a lapwing, and make a confection thereof. With this said confection make a fumigation in a convenient place, and you shall see visions in the air. Take of the said confection, and make a fumigation about the sepulchers, and visions of the dead shall and will appear.
And note and mark all this well, that these said matters have times and due observations perfitly to be done, and kept properly under the true frame and concourse of the heavens, according to their proper qualites and influences, in each degree. For the which you may work, as in the chapters before written it appears more plainly.
The suffumigations of the twelve signs, and of their faces.
•	[Aries] Take for the fumigation of the sign of Aries myrrh.
•	[Taurus] Take for the fumigation for the sign of Taurus, costus.
•	[Gemini] Take for the fumigation for the sign of Gemini, mastic.
•	[Cancer] Take for the fumigation for the sign of Cancer, camphor.
•	[Leo] Take for the sign of Leo, the fumigation, thu.
•	[Virgo] Take for the fumigation for the sign of Virgo, sanders.
•	[Libra] Take for the singe of libra, this fumigation, galbanum.
•	[Scorpio] Take for the sign Scorpio, this fumigation, oponianac.
•	[Sagittarius] Take for the sign of Sagittarius, this fumigation, lignum [aloes].
•	[Capricorn] Take for the sign of Capricorn, this fumigation, asam
•	[Aquarius] Take for the sign of Aquarius, this fumigation, euphorbium
•	[Pisces] Take for the sign of Pisces this fumigation, thimiamatis, called armoniacum.
Suffumigations of the faces of the twelve signs.
•	Prima facies   teuer mirram; 2. scamonum; 3. pip nigrum.
•	Prima   costum; 2. cardamonum; 3. coprssum.
•	Prima facies   muscum; 2. succhum; 3. nucem muscatum.
•	Prima   galbanium; 2. ut almea; 3. garyophilum.
•	Prima facies [Capricorn] asafetedam; 2. celephamam; .3. pip longum.
•	Prima [aquarie] euforbium; 2. ruberberum; 3. scamoneam.
•	Prima [Pisces] tenet thimiama; 2. crocum; 3. sandalum album.
•	1. [Leo] tenet thus; 2. lignum balsum; 3. mir muscata.
•	Prima [Virgo] sandalus; 2. crocum; 3. masticem.
And look what fumigation we give the first hour of the  ; the same must you give all that day, and so likewise of others.
De suffumigationibus temporum.
•	In primo tempore lignum aloes, thus, et crocum.
•	In secundo tempore thimiama, id est armoniacum, costum, masticem.
•	In tertio tempore sandalos, cassia et mirtum.
•	In quarto tempore muscum succum et lignum balsami.

De fumigationibus quatuor pertium mundi quatuer elementorum.
•	In oriente parte et super ignem sunt ambra, muscus, et alba cera.
•	In parte meredei, et terrae, sunt algalya, almea, et tyryaca.
•	In occidentalii parte et in aere sunt balsamus, camphora, et olium olmarum.
•	In septentrione et aqua sunt lignum aloes, nux muscata, et maceys.

________________________________________
7	[The names of the angels.]
The names of the angels that have power over the seven days of the week, and over the seven stars, and who go upon the seven heavens, and other while in their chairs be these.
Capziel, Satquiel, Samael, Raphael, Anael (or Amael), Michael, and Gabriel.
And the power of these is that Capziel is the power of Sabbathai (Saturn), Satquiel of Zedek (Jupiter), Samael of Madim (Mars), Raphael of Hamina (Sol), Anael of Nogah (Venus), Michael of Cocab (Mercury), and Gabryel of Labana (The Moon). And every one of these sits in his heaven.
Nomina aeris in quatuor temporibus.
•	In primo tempore dicitr ystana.
•	In secundo, surail.
•	In tertio, oadyon.
•	In quarto gulyon,
And the names of the angels who have power in the air and above these are: Raphael, Guabriel, Michael, Cherubin, Seraphin, Orchyne, Pataceron, Mycraton, Sandalson, Barachyel, Rageyel, Tobyell, and you will name them in all things which you may accomplish in the air, and with God's help you will succeed.
Nomina terrae in quatuor . temporibus anni:
•	In primo dicitur Nyguedam.
•	In secundo, Yabassa.
•	In tertio, Tobell.
•	In quarto, Aradon.
And the angels of the Earth are these:
Samael, yatayell, baranyell, oryell, arfanyel, tatgryel, danael, affaryell, pactryell, baell, byenyell. And you should name these names of the angels over the Earth in those things which you accomplish in the Earth, and with God's help you will succeed. 
11. The names of the months are these:
Nisan, Iyar, mantanius, abelul, Tishrei, marquesnam,Kislev, Tevet, Shevat, Adar, postadar, postremus. 
The names of the potestates are these,
and they are twelve princes or rulers, that is, one for every month: Oriel, Sasuyell, Amariel, Noriel, Beraquiel, Magnyuya, Suriel, Barfiell, Adoniel, Anael, Gabriel, Romiel, Laciel.
And every one of these has as many potestates or helpers, more or greater as there are days in the month, or many other servants.
12. The names of the angels of the twelve months.
The names of the angels that are mighty and more mighty in the first month, which is called Nisan, are these:
Oriel, Malaquiram, Acya, Zaziel, Paltifur, Yesmachia, Yariel, Araton, Robica, Sephatia, Anaya, Guesupales, Seniquiel, Sereriel . Malquia, Aricasom, Pacita, Abdiel, Ramasdon, Cafiel, Nascyasori, Sugni, Aszrus, Sornadaf, Admiel, Necamia, Caysaac, Benyh, Q~uor, Adziriell.
The names of the second month, which is called Iyar in the Hebrew language.
Safuelor, Sasnyeil, Santon, Cartemat, Aliel, Paltnia, Bargar, Galmus, Necpis, Aarom, Manit, Aadon, Quenanel, Quemon, Rasegar, Affrie, Absamon, Sarsall, Aspin, Carbiel, Regnia, Athlas, Nadis, Abitasi, Abitan, Palilet.
The names of the angels of the third month that is calledSivan are these:
Amariel, Tabriell, Casmuch, Nastifa, Almur, Naamab, Mamica, Zicaran, Samisarach, Naasein, Andas, Paltamus, Abris, Borzac, Saforac, Yayat, Dalia, Aziger, Nabsuf, Abuifor, Zenam, Dersam, Cefania, Maccasor, Naboon, Adiell, Maasiell, Szarzir, Tartalion, Adyysar.
These are the names of the angels of the fourth month, which is called Tammuz.
Noriel, Safida, Asaf, Mazica, Sarsac, Adryyaac, Nagron, Galuf, Galgal, Danroc, Saracu, Remafydda, Lulyaraf, Nedylar, Tyaf, Taanat, Lafayel, Ganida, Nedir, Delqua, Maadon, Samiel, Amrael, Lezaydi, As, Ohoc, Nasyby, Razyarsady, Yadna, Caspa, Garitan, Elysafan, Pastama, Maday.
The names of the angels of the fifth month, called Av, are these:
Beraquiel, Manhy (or Amarya), Haya, Byny, Madrat, Aman, Tuliell, Cossuro, Fartis, Nactif, Nekyff, Pegner, Tablic, Manuat, Amasya, Guatiell, Reycat, Gnynzy, Paliel, Gadeff, Nesgnyraf, Abrac, Animiter, Carnby, Nachall, Cabake, Loch, Macria, Sase, Essaf.
These are the names of the angels of the sixth month, which is called Elul.
Magnyny, Arabiell, Haniell, Nacery, Yassar, Rassy, Boell, Mathiall, Naccameryf, Zacdon, Nafac, Rapion, Saspy, Salhy, Rasersh, Malquiell, Sanytiell, Yoas, Gualaly, Danpy, Yamla, Golum, Zasziell, Satpach, Nassa, Myssyn, Macratyf, Dadiell, Carciell, Effygmato.
These are the names of the angels of the seventh month, which is called Tishrei..
Surgell (or suriel), Sarycam, Guabryza, Szncariell, Sabybiall, Ytrnt, Cullia, Dadiel, Marham, Abercaysdon, Sacdon, Pagnlan, Arsabon, Aspyramon, Agniel, Sastyracnas, Altym, Masulaef, Salamiel, Sascuniel, Barcaran, Yahnt, Alycas, Vlysacyaia, Abry.
The names of the angels of the eighth month, which is called marquesnan [Heshvan], are these:
Barbits (or Barfiell), Tylzdiell, Raamiell, Nehubaell, Alysaf, Baliel, Arzaf, Rashiel, Alson, Naspiell, Becar, Paliel, Elysu, Aiguap, Nacpas, Sansany, Aesal, Maarym, Sascy, Yalsenac, Mabint, Magdiell, Saneinas, Maaliel, Arsafael, Nanyseyorar, Vecabalaf, Napybael, Suciel, Nabnell, Sariell, Sodiel, Marenell, Palytam.
The names of the angels of the ninth month, which is called Kislev, are these:
Edoniel, Radiel, Maduch, Racino, Hyzy, Mariel, Azday, Mandiel, Gumiel, Seriel, Kery, Sahaman, Osmyn, Sechiel, Pazehemy, Chalchyphay, Gey, Idael, Necad, Mynael, Arac, Ararygugel, Galnel, Gimon, Satuel, Elynzy, Baquylaguall.
The names of the angels of the tenth month, which is calledTevet, are these:
Anael, Amiel, Acior, Naslia, Rapines, Raacpel, Pacrel, Halion, Guanrynasnihe, Aslaom, Naspaya, Neapry, Sanihay, Hasasylgason, Gastaset, Yfaryamy, Man, Polimas, Sarananuf, Olyab, Sariel, Canel, Raziell, Pmla, Nisquem, Sarman, Malysan, Asyzat, Marimoe. 
The names of the angels of the eleventh month, which is called Shevat, are these:
Gabriel, Ysrael, Natriel, Gasziel, Nassam, Abrysaf, Zefaell, Zamiel, Mamiel, Taliel, Myriel, Sahiniel, Guriel, Samhiell, Dariel, Banorsasty, Satymn, Nasiel, Ransiel, Talguaf, Lebrachiel, Daliell, Gandriel, Sahuhaf, Myschiel.
The names of the angels of the twelfth month, which is called Adar, are these:
Romiel, Patiel, Guriel, Azriel, Paamiel, Cartiel, El, Anunalbeh, Parhaya, Ysael, Beriel, Laell, Tenebiel, Panten, Panteron, Faniel, Falason, Manciel, Pataron, Labiel, Ragael, Cetabiel, Nyazpatael.
The names of the angels of the thirteenth month, which is called Büsextilis, which is called Adar the last in March,are these:
Laciel (or Lantiel), Ardiel, Nosmiel, Ardiel, Celydael, Amiel, Malquiel, Gabaliel, Susuagos, Barylaguy, Yabtasyper, Magos, Sangos, Yayell, Yel, Yasmiel, Steluiel, Garasyn, Ceyabgos, Sacadiel, Garacap, Gabanael, Tamtiel.
The names of the days of the week with their angels, strong and mighty upon every day, and every one in his day.
The names of the angels that serve in the day of   are these:
Daniel, Olyeill, Saffiell, Dargoyeill, Yelbrayeiell, Cemaguill, Gebarbaya, faceyeill, Caram, Neyeill, Talgylueil, Bethtaez, Raneil, Salha, Hyeill, Armaquieyeill, Romail, Gybrill, Zemail, Mychaze, Zarsayeill, Amail, Antorayeill, Ronayeill, Reniayeill, barhil, Marhill, Rarorhill, Merhill, Zarafill, Zaraill, An, Quyhim, Ceytatinin, Ezniah, Vehich, Dunedryneylin, Yedemkieil, Esmaadin, Elbedagrin, Zamaanel, Yocaleme, Detryeill, Aryeil, Arnaeill, Veremedin, Vnaraxidin.
These are the angels in the day of the  
Semhazylin, Semyhylim, Yasrozin, Agrasnydin, Aymsylin, Cathneylin, Alrasachysin, Abrachasin, Layralosin, Lang, Hasin, Anaenim, Niangarorin, Aezonin, Montazin, Labelas, Mafatin, Feya, Rachin, Cadanagin, Laeradonin, Caffrnbrin, Bachramin, Varthalin, Amnanyneylin, Hacoylin, Balganaychin, Aryeylin, Badeylin, Abranorin, Tarmanydin, Amdalysin, Sahgragynin, Adyanienin, Sacstoyein, Latebayfanisin, Caybeininin, Nabyalin, Cyzamanin, Abramacin, Laryagathin, Bofealyquin, Bayealadin, Gasorin, Asaphin, Daryenin, Macnayelin, Gomraorin, Marybin, Yebirin, Arilin, Faryelin, Nepenyelin, Banyelin, Astyeilin, Ceradadin.
These are the angels that serve in the day of  :
Samayelin, Tartalin, Doppeil, Racyelin, Farabin, Cabin, Asymolin, Mabareilin, Tralyeilin, Rubbelin, Marmarin, Tafanyelin, Fuheilin, Ruffar, Aneilin, Rabsilin, Eralin, Pyrteplin, Brofilin, Cacyrilin, Naffreinin, Nupurin, Raffilin, Nyrilin, Nyenyolin, Nybirin, Celabrill, Tubeilin, Haain, Vein, Paafirin, Cetenoilin, Letytyeilin, Rarafeill, Canueil, Bastailin, Costirin, Montyelin, Albilin, Parachbeill, Alyeill, Vaceill, Zalcicill, Amadieill, Vsararieill, Lyncodoneil, Daffripeil, Vnlilin, Carfzoneill, Gronieill, Gabrinin, Narbeill.
The names of the angels that serve in the day of   be these.
Michael, Beerel, Dafngel, Aryhyriel, Boel, Bariel, Meriel, Amiel, Aol, Semeol, Aaen, Berion, Sarinon, Keinerion, Feynon, Aneinin, Zamazinin, Cananin, Aall, Merygall, Pegal, Gabal, Veal, Aumeal, Faranyeal, Gebin, Caribifin, Autarilin, Metorilin, Nabyafsin, Fysfin, Barsslilin, Caruphilin, Danyturla, Fenyturla, Geumyturla, Amia, Alnamia, Tabinia, Nafia, Myacha, Tyagra, Bec, Alacaorinill, Benenonill. 
The names of the angels in the day of   are these:
Satquiel, Ahyell, Yebel, Aneniel, Jumiel, Juniel, Amiel, Faniel, Ramuel, Sanfael, Sacciniel, Galbiel, Lafiel, Maziel, Ymraell, Memiell, Pariel, Panhiniel, Toupiel, Ambaniel, Omiell, Orfiell, Ael, Hearel, Memiel, Ynel, Syumeliel, Tranfiel, Mefeniel, Antquiel, Quisiell, Cumiriel, Rofiniel, Rubyeiel, Beell, Bariel, Cheduriel.
The names of the angels of the day of   are these:
Hasuayeil, Barneyeil, Verday, Heill, Alzeyeill, Szeyeill, Bacapel, Zelfayeill, Morayeill, Borayeill, Alpheyeill, Arobilin, Canofilin, Ourilin, Zaryalin, Marilin, Bacoraye, Kolfayelin, Azrayeilin, Ambayeirin, Mayeilin, Cabueirin, Alseirin, Asueirin, Alneirin, Nenanrin, Rayorin, Orinin, Gedulin, Harerin, Namilin, Halilin, Hymeilin, Reffilin, Narraabilin, Hahyeilin, Landelin, Esfilin, Thefealin, Patnelin, Keyalin, Nailin, Leyraiell, Ablayeill, Talraylanrain, Barkalin, Bahoraelin.
The names of the angels in the day of   are these:
Myeraton, Pacrifon, Polypon, Capeiell, Eheniton, Alfiton, Cherion, Sandalson, Panion, Almion, Erpion, Paxon, Calirxon, Horrion, Melison, Unrion, Tonelion, Refaebilion, Moniteon, Bornailon, Paxilon, Lelalion, Onoxion, Quibon, Quiron, Vixasmion, Relion, Cassilon, Tifonion, Murion, Degion, Dapsion, Lenaion, Orleunion, Foilion, Monichion, Gabion, Paxonion, Pinsilon, Lepiron, Loeloon, Saron, Salion, Pion, Nargeron, Aaron, Selyypon, Pinmibron, Raconcall, Zelibron.
Finis.

________________________________________
8	[CXXXVII 20-22]
Before that, these three prayers following must be said over the blood. You must go [=face] towards Jerusalem, that is, Eastward, and you must say over the blood the exorcism that is [also] said over the salt which is put into holy water. And that must be said three [times], except that the names must be changed thus, "I exorcise thee O thou creature of blood", instead of "... thou creature of salt," which God commanded by Solomon to be put into the seal, instead of which God commanded by his prophet Helyzeus to be put into water, and so forth of the rest, and this exorcism thus said three [times], with a stole [=scarf] about your neck, then say the prayers following thrice. That done, the blood shall be consecrated, and meet [=suitable] for the seal.
Exorcizo te creatura sanguis + per deum vivum + per deum verum + per deum sanctum + per deum qui Salomonem in eius diuinam Sigillum primum in ssic: ut sanaretur sterilitas Sanguis efficiaris exorcizatum in salutem credentium: ut sis omnibus te sumentibus sanitas animae et corporis et effugiat atque disendat ab iste sanguine omnia samasia et nequitia vel versutia diabolicae fraudis: omnisque spiritus in mundus adiuratus per eum, qui venturus est iudicare vivos et mortuos et seculum per ignem. Amen.
Exorcizo te creatura Sanguis que In nomine + Dei patris omnipotentis et In nomine + Iesu Christi filii eius domini nostri, et in virtute Spiritus Sancti, ut fias sanguine exorcizate ad effugandam omnem potestatem inimiel et ipsum inimicum eradicare et explantare valeas cum angelis suis apostaticis, per virtutem eiusdem domini nostri + Iesu Christi qui vnturus est iudicare vivos et mortuos et seculum per ignem. Amen.
9	[CXXXVII 1-19]
O Invisible God, O Inestimable God, O Ineffable God, O Incommutable God, O Incorruptible God, O most mercifull God, O most Sweet God, O High and Glorious God. O God of infinite mercy, I, although an unworthy sinner, full of iniquity, deceit, and malice, most humbly come to your mercy, praying and beseeching you not to have respect to all and innumerable mine iniquities, but even as you are wont to have mercy upon sinners, and to hear the prayers of the humble and meek, even so I beseech you to vouchsafe to hear me, your servant, although unworthy, yet calling unto you for the blessing and consecrating of this blood, your creature, that it may be made apt and worthy for the ink of your most precious and Holy Seal, and of your name Schemhamphoras, so that it may have the aptnes and meteness which it ought to have by your most holy name, which is written with four letters, Joth, He, Vau, Daleth, Agla, Eloy, Yayin, Theos, Deus, which being heard all celestial, terrestrial, and infernal creatures do tremble, fear, and worship it. And by these your most holy names, On, Alpha and Omega, Principium, El, Ely, Eloe, Eloy, Elion, Sother, Emmanuel, Sabaoth, Adonay, Egge, Ya, Ya, Ye Ye, may this creature of blood be blessed, prepared, and made apt for the ink of your holy seal, and of your most holy name, Schemhamphoras, which is blessed, world without end. Amen.

Another prayer for the same.
O good Jesus Christ, for your ineffable mercy, spare me and have mercy upon me and hear me now through the invocation of the name of the Holy Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and that you would accept and take in good worth the prayers and words of my mouth, by the invocation of your one hundred holy names, that is to saye, Agla, Monhon, Tetragrammaton, Olydeus, Ocleiste, Amphinethon, Lamtara, Ianemyer, Saday, Hely, Horlon, Portenthymon, Ihelur, Gofgamep, Emmanuel, On, Admihel, Honzmorp, Ioht, Hofob, Rasamarathon, Anethi, Erihona, Iuestre, Saday, Maloht,. Sethoe, Elscha, Abbadaia, Alpha et Omega, Leiste, Oristion, Ieremon, Hosb, Merkerpon, Elzephares, Egirion, Betha, Ombonar, Stimulamathon, Orion, Erion, Noimos, Peb, Nathanothay, Theon, Ysiston, Porho, Rothon, Lethellethe, Ysmas, Adonay, Athionadabir, Onoytheon, Hosga, Leyndra, Nosulaceps, Tutheon, Gelemoht, Paraclitus, Occymomion, Erchothas, Abracio, Anepheneton, Abdon, Melche, Sother, Usirion, Baruch, Sporgongo, Genonem, Messias, Pantheon, Zabuather, Rabarmas, Iskiros, Kyrios, Gelon, Hel, Rethel, Nathi, Ymeinlethon, Karex, Sabaoth, Sallaht, Cirhos, Opiron, Nomigon, Orihel, Theos, Ya, Horha, Christus, Holbeke, Tosgac, Occimomos, Eliorem, Heloy, Archina, Rabur.humbly and faithfully beseeching you, although unworthy yet trusting in you that you would sanctify and bless this blood by your most holy names aforesaid, and by this nameSchemhamphoras of seventy-two letters, that by the power, holiness, and virtue of the same names and by your divine might and power this blood may be consecrated, blessed, and strengthed by the virtue of your most holy body and blood, that it may have the virtue and aptness which it ought to have without any deceit, that it may be worthy to write your holy seal, that it may have the effect which it ought to have through our Lorde Jesus, who sits in the highest, to whom be honor, praise, and glory, world without end. Amen.

The blessing of it.
God the Father bless you, God the Son bless you, God the Holy Ghost bless you. May Holy Mary mother of our Lord Jesus Christ bless and sanctify you, Oh blood, that you may have the might and power of a sacrament in writing of the Seal of God. May all holy virgins bless you this day and ever. May all the holy and elect of God, and all the celestial powers bless you, and confirm and strengthen you. May all angels and archangels, virtues, principates, potestates, thrones, and dominations, cherubin, and seraphin, by the authority and license of God, bless you, by the merits and all the prayers of your saints, O Lord Jesus Christ, that you would bless + sanctify + and consecrate + this blood, and strengthen it, by your almighty power, and that your seal that shall herewith be written may have the power which it ought to have, and for that purpose and intent for the which it is ordained through our Lord Jesus Christ, whose reign and empire does continue, world without end. Amen.
10	[VI.] First Oration.1
Direct, we beg you, O Lord, our actions by your holy inspirations, and carry them on by your gracious assistance, that every prayer and work of ours may begin always with you, and through you be happily ended. Amen.
11	[VII.] Second Oration
Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee. Blessed art thou amongst women and blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus. Holy Mary, Mother [of God], pray for us. Amen.
12	[VIII.] Third Oration.2
Hail holy queen, mother of mercy,
Hail our life, our sweetness and our hope.
To you do we cry poor banished children of Eve,
To you do we send up our sighs, mourning and weeping
in this valley of tears.
Turn then, most gracious advocate
your eyes of mercy toward us.
And after this, our exile,
Show us the fruit of your womb, Jesus.
O clement, O loving, O sweet [virgin] Mary. 

Pray for us, Holy Mother of God
That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.
13	[IX.] Oration 4
O glorious <lady> Mary, eternal virgin, glorious mother, mother of the church, mother of piety and leniency, hail, O dearest lady, Mary, eternal virgin, mother of light, the eternal honour, the image of serenity. (2) Hail, most pious lady Mary, the court of God, the gate of heaven, the shrine of the Holy Spirit. Hail, most pius lady Mary, that vessel of gold, that temple of the divinity, cushion of eternal piety. Hail, most merciful lady Mary, the glory of maidens, the ruler of nations, the queen of the angels. Hail most loving lady Mary, overflowing fountain, the washing of sins, the refreshment of souls. Hail, most desired lady Mary, mother of orphans, the breast of infants, comforter of the wretched. Hail, holy parent. Hail, holy and immaculate virgin, who stands near the face of God, mindful of our frailty. 

Hail, most kind, hail, most agreeable, hail, most merciful. You will be propitiated, eternal virgin, blessed and glorious, ever chaste Mary, you who are the most hallowed virgin and blessed mother of God, brightest star of the sea. 

Hail, ever glorious, precious pearl, beautiful as the lily, fragrant as the rose. Halleluia! Direct me in this blessed vision. 

I entreat you, eternal queen, holy Mary, through the love of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and through your trusted heavenly shrine, and through the great pities which you have made over me and over the human race, and through the virtues and through the solemn mysteries of the cross, and through the holy nails fastened to his precious hands and feet, and through the five sacred wounds to his precious body, where he redeemed us on the holy cross, in order that you may plead to your beloved son on my behalf, and on behalf of all my sins, and for the needs of my soul and of my body, (petition, e.g.) in order that I, while yet living, may be worthy to see and praise you. Amen.
(Here recite your petition according to the effect of the which you work. Do so in the [appropriate place] of every prayer before written, and [...])
14	[X.]
Rejoice,1 O immaculate virgin, mother of God. Give me joy. Rejoice, you who received the tidings of joy from the angel, and give me the joy of the vision of God. Rejoice, you who brought forth the clarity of eternal light. Rejoice, mother of God, and give me the joy of the vision of God, that I may be raised up from all my difficulties and tribulations and the faults which are in my heart, and I ask further, that I may be firmly by your side, for seeing the living and eternal God. I adore you, O holy mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, and I praise and glorify you. I adore your exaltation. I adore your chastity and virginity. I adore your piety and your mercy. I adore your blessed innermost parts, which have born God and Man. I adore your blessed womb, which has born Lord Jesus. I adore your blessed breasts, which have nursed the savior the World. I beg of you, dearest Mary ever virgin, through the love of your son our Lord Jesus Christ, to intervene for me, a sinner, that I may have the vision of the eternal God while yet alive, and assist me in all my difficulties and needs, and do not abandon me, so I may not be without help in this blessed vision nor on the terrible day when my soul departs from my body, or in that wonderful hour, when it will be dragged away, for seeing the living eternal God. I gratiously ask you to make me come to the gates of Paradise, that I may be worthy to see your son there, and that I may be worthy to have the wondrous eternal divine vision, with your most glorious son himself, who lives and reigns world without end. Amen.
15	[XI.] Oration *5.
I, an unworthy sinner, for the praise and honor of the most glorious and eternal virgin Mary, mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, of his sacred names, since I am unworthy, because of my meager perception I take care to name with the Holy Spirit’s command.
O glorious mother of God, O eternal virgin Mary, do not deem me unworthy because of my great wickedness and innumerable iniquities, but mercifully and favorably accepting that which I, although unworthy, offer and desire for your honour. And so I wish to clearly name and exalt your holy names most conscientiously, with my heart, with my mouth, and with my labor. 

So you are named Mary, Creator, Mother, Bride, Daughter, Theotan, Virga, Vessel, Balsamus, Cloud, Dew, Peace Maker, the First, Queen, Dawn, Empress, Lady, Handmaiden, Risen, the Spring, the Well, the Way, the Life, the Path, the Brilliance, the Golden Star, the Light, the Moon, Glass Window, the Doorway, the Gate, the Curtain, the Chamber, the Home, Guest Room, the Receptacle, the Temple, the Hall, the Tabernacle, the Manna, Community, Free, the Stole, the River, the Bridge, the Grape, the Pomegranate, Female, Nurse, Woman, Tower, Ship, Redemptress, Liberator, Friend, the Bedroom, the Vally, Cinnamon, the Turtle-dove, the Dove, the Lily, the Rose, the Consolation, the Refuge, the Hope, the Salvation, the Glory, the Foundation, the True Medicine of Sinners, the Shrine of the Holy Spirit, the Root of Jesse, the Antidote, the Recreatrix, Sion, the Girl, She who is Compassionate. 

I beg for your most holy compassion, that through these divine names of yours, which I, though full of filth, have now dared to offer before your altar, in order that you hear me in this hour and may you unsatiably (?) deem me worthy to see and praise you and your glorious son, while my small body is still living.
And I disturb you, O glorious one, through your son, whom you conceived, whom you begat, whom you have borne, whose body you nursed, whom you bathed, whom you wrapped in cloths, whom you presented at the temple, whose preaching you heard, whose suspension from the cross on our behalf you saw, whose death and burial you witnessed, whose rising from the dead you observed, whose ascension to the Father in heaven you saw, and who will soon return from there to judge the living and the dead and the world by fire, likewise through him I dare to name [you] and beg for help, with impure lips, with impure flesh, with impure body, with impure mind, (here recite petition)16that through this work you will enable me to look at and see yourself, and the holy Trinity, with your holy angels, and in the end at the Great Judgement you will snatch me away from eternal punishment, through Christ our Lord. Amen.
16	[XII. Oration 6. The Creed.]
[I believe in God, the Father Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth. And in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord: who was conceived by the Holy Spirit, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, died, and was buried; he descended into hell; the third day he rose again from the dead; he ascended into heaven; sitteth at the right hand of God the Father Almighty; from thence he shall come to judge the living and the dead. I believe in the Holy Spirit, the holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and life everlasting. Amen.] 
17	[XIII. Oratio 7: Symbolum Athanasianum]
"Whoever wishes to be saved [and have the vision of God], should above all things hold to the Catholic faith. Whoevery fails to keep it whole and undefiled, without doubt shall perish everlastingly. And the Catholic faith is this: That we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, neither confounding the persons, nor dividing the substance. For there is one person of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the Holy Spirit. But the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit is all one, the glory equal, the majesty coeternal. Such as the Father is, such is the Son, and such is the Holy Ghost. The Father uncreate, the Son uncreate, and the Holy Ghost uncreate. The Father incomprehensible, the Son incomprehensible, and the Holy Ghost incomprehensible. The Father eternal, the Son eternal, and the Holy Ghost eternal. And yet they are not three eternals, but one eternal. As also there are not three uncreates, nor three incomprehensibles, but one uncreate and one incomprehensible. So likewise the Father is almighty, the Son almighty, and the Holy Ghost almighty. And yet they are not three almighties, but one almighty. So the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, and yet they are not three Gods, but one God. So likewise the Father is Lord, the Son Lord, and the Holy Ghost Lord, and yet they are not three Lords, but one Lord. For like as we are compelled by the Christian verity to acknowledge every person by himself to be God and Lord, so are we forbidden by the Catholic religion to say there are three Gods or three Lords. The Father is made of none, neither created, nor begotten. The Son is of the Father alone, not made nor created, but begotten. The Holy Ghost is of the Father and of the Son, neither made, nor created, nor begotten, but proceeding. So there is one Father, not three Fathers; one Son, not three Sons; one Holy Ghost, not three Holy Ghosts. And in this Trinity none is before or after another, none is greater or less than another. But the whole three Persons are co-eternal together, and co-equal. So that in all things, as is aforesaid, the Unity in Trinity and the Trinity in Unity is to be worshipped. He therefore that will be saved must thus think of the Trinity. Furthermore, it is necessary to everlasting salvation that he also believe rightly the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ. For the right faith is, that we believe and confess that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is God and Man. God, of the substance of the Father, begotten before the worlds; and Man, of the substance of his mother, born in the world. Perfect God, and perfect Man, of a reasonable soul and human flesh subsisting. Equal to the Father as touching his Godhead, and inferior to the Father as touching his Manhood. Who, although he be God and Man, yet he is not two, but one Christ. One; not by conversion of the Godhead into flesh, but by taking of the Manhood into God. One altogether, not by confusion of Substance, but by unity of Person. For as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man, so God and Man is one Christ; Who suffered for our salvation, descended into hell, rose again the third day from the dead; He ascended into heaven, he sitteth on the right hand of the Father, God, Almighty; from whence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. At whose coming all men shall rise again with their bodies; and shall give account for their own works. And they that have done good shall go into life everlasting; and they that have done evil into everlasting fire. This is the Catholic faith, which except a man believe faithfully, he cannot be saved. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost; As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen." 
18	[XIV. Oration 8]
Following divine instruction, and the teachings of the Saviour +called down+, I dare to say:15
Our Father,1 who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name; Thy kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven; give us this day our daily bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil. Amen.
19	[XV. Oration 9.]1
Alpha and Omega, O almighty God, the beginning of all things, without beginning, the ending without an end, hear today my prayers, O most holy one, neither repay me according my iniquity nor my sins, O Lord, my God, but according to your mercy, which is greater than all things visible and invisible. Have mercy on me, the wisdom of the Father, O Christ, the light of the angels, the glory of the saints, the hope and haven and refuge of sinners, the originator of all things and redeemer of human frailties, who holds the weight of heaven and earth, and the seas and mountains in the palm of your hand. I beg and entreat you, O most holy one, that you, being one with the Father, will illuminate my soul with the ray of your most Holy Spirit, (Here recite your petition; if for the divine vision, say as follows:2) that I may be able to progress in this most sacred art, so that I might be worthy to achieve the vision of your face, O God eternal, through the virtue of your most Holy Spirit and of your name. And you, who are are my God, who in the beginning created the heaven and the earth, and all things out of nothing, who through your holy Spirit you restore, fill, and renew all things, heal my soul, that I may glorify you through all my thought, and words, and deeds. O God the Father, strengthen my oration, and increase both my comprehension and my memory, for undertaking your blessed vision while my mortal body is yet living, and for learning the most high and eternal, facing your essence, you who live and reign through the infinite ages of the ages. Amen.
20	[XVI.] Oration 10.
Helysemath + hazaram1 + hemel + saduch + theon + heloy + zamaram + zoma + ietromaym + theos + Deus pie et fortishamathamal + ietronamayhala + zanay + hacronaaz + zay + colnaphan + salmazaiz + ayhal . gemelam + geromelam + haymasa + ramay + genzi + zamath + heliemath + semay + selmar + iecrosamay + iachat + lemar + harana + hamany + memothemath + hemelamp + and thou, holy Father, almighty and incomprehensible God, in all thy works which are holy, just, and good + megalhamethor + semassaer + zamathamar + geogremai + megus + monorail + hamezeaza + hillebata + maraama + iehenas + iehemia + malamai + sephormay + zemonoma + melas + hemay + hemesua + iecormay + lemesey + senosecari + zemaher + helcamay + calion + tharathos + tronios + nebay + tharathos + vsyon + gezsethon + seminathemas + zezehas + thamam + helomany + hamel. Amen.
21	[XVII.] Oration 11.1
Theos + megale + patir + ymos + hebrel + habobel + hecoy + haley + helyhot + hety + *hebeot + letiel + iezey + sadam + *salaseey + salatial + salatelli + samel + sadamiel + saday + helgyon + helliel + lemegos + mitron + megos + myheon + legmes + muthon + *michohyn + heel + hesely + iecor + *graual + semhel + semobzhat + semeltha + samay + geth + gehel + rasahanay + gelgemana + semana + *harasymihon + salepatir + selapati + ragion + saletha + thurigium + hepatir + vsion + hatamas + hetanas + harayn.

22	[XVIII.]1
O almighty and everlasting God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Adonay, the light of the world, the giver and inestimable disposer of all wisdom and of all spiritual grace, knowing all things before they be done, making both light and darkness.
Put forth thy hand, and touch both my soul and body, and make it clean as a new scoured sword.2
(Here recite your petition; if it is for the divine vision, say as follows:)
That I may see thy deity, and make it as a chosen shaft or as a wheat kernel, to behold thy glorious face, and send thy Holy Spirit, O Lord, into my heart and into my soul, to receive thy gift, to purge and cleanse my conscience, to behold thy divine majesty, by the promise that thow hast made, that is to say by thy right hand of thy godly foreknowledge, and infunde or pour thy grace most mercifully and most gently into me, and teach and instruct me, and renew all my senses, and teach me. Clarify and purge me, and correct me according to thy most godly disipline, even unto my life's end.
(Here recite your petition; if it is for the divine vision, say as follows:)
And help me with thy godly council, that I may see thy divine majesty face to face, through thy infinite great mercy and goodness. Amen.
23	[XIX]
(If you wish to work towards obtaining some knowledge, or for the consecration of the book, or for the help of a spirit, then alter the petition in the oration preceding, thus saying.)
Put forth thy hand and touch my mouth, and make it as a sharp sword, to pronounce these holy words, and make my tongue like a chosen shaft to pronounce and tell out thy marvels and wonders, and also to retain them in my memory.
(If you are endeavoring for knowledge, then say as I have shown here, but if for the consecration of the book, say as follows.)
Put forth thy hand and touch my mouth and make it like a sharp sword, to consecrate and sanctify these as well deeds as words, and make them even as a chosen shaft, to confirm the truth of all thy wonders, and to pronounce them and to obtain them at my pleasure.
(if for the invocation of spirits, say as follows.)
Put forth thy hand and touch my mouth, and make it like a sharp sword, to declare and speak forth as well words as deeds as other things, to constrain and compel to come and to answer, to stand, and to go away, such spirits * N *, unto me * N *, the son of such a man * N *, to shew me the marvels of thy holy power, and to speak unto me, and to be subject unto me.
(And if thou wilt ask for any other thing than is aforementioned, then always alter and change thy petition according to thy intent and purpose. And not only in the foresaid prayers, but in all the other prayers following.) 
24	[XX] Oration 12.1
Assaylemaht. rasay. semaht. azahat. haraaht. lameth. hazabat. hamat. hamae. gesemon. grephemyon. zelamye. relamye. hazatha. hamatha. hazaremehal. hazanebal. helial. zebial. seziol. semyhor. hamissiton. fintiugon. tintiugethe. hamissirion. sebarnay. halmoht. alymyon. gemail. halmiot. sadail. hehomail. neomail. Cristos. thiothot. sepha. taphamal. paphalios. sicrogramon. laupdau. laupta. iothim. iothileta. lazahemor. iemeamor. lotahemor. fitcomegal. haemor. giselector. gilzelerethon. glereleon. gamasgay. semagar. semalgay. semasgyy. balua. arethon. iesamahel. gegemahelay. hala. hela. iemay. semethay. may. semnay. geles. syney. iolehemey. iesmar. samennay. bariactoca. cariactera. tharihetha. socalmata. getimay. socalma. socagamal. helgezamay. balma. hailoso halos. zaynos. ienenegal. sarimalip. sarmalaip. sacramalaip. tamygel. thamahel. sathabynhel. sathabinal. samal. maga. samalanga. saminaga. satalmagu. silimal. salmana. saguaht. silimythu. semalsay. gahit. galiht. gezamannay. sabal. zegahathon. zahanphaton. iezanycrathon. ietuaphaton. iezemo. iezelem. ioselimen. hatanathos. hathanathay. semaht. zemehet. iezorahel. checorab. Hel. gerozabal. craton. hariabal. hariagal. hanagai. hariagil. parithomegos. samazihel. simazihel. leosemmaht. leosamaty. themiathol. genynatol. gemizacol. hebalthe. halabee. hamisschon. sebanay. halmye. gemail. sadail. neomahil. cristolepha. caphanial. hazaron. gezamel. haymal. hayhala. sememay. gehesmoy. thariattha. gemiazai. zohanphaton. ielesamen. hatanathay. gemaht. iesomabel. haynosiel. halabethen. iabaioge. halabeht. ebalohe.|1h- nyphos. phabos. phelior. phobos. ydolmassay. predolmassay. pholihor. negioggen. neginather. pharampnee. pharanehe. scomicopoten. sohomychepoten. hymaliassenon. ymiamos. manyahas. geromay. iemay. ietathama-zai. passamaht. Theon. beht. bon. sathamat|1i- hagynol. naragal. semozihot. nerothinay. raguathi. raguali. ranal. ragahal. hagmal. hagamal. fagomossyn. fagemesym. domogentha. theomogen. theromogen. salmatha. salamaht. zalamatha. Hon. bolon. halon. sephezimu. sapynon. saphiamon. hamon. harion. usion. gemession. sepha. phalymyt. sebanay. hamyssithon. thyutyugren. hactou. rogoubon. lon. usion. Amen.

25	[XXI. Oration 13.]1
Hazailemaht. lemaht. azat. gessemon. thelamoht. hazab. halatal. haebal. sezior. sicromagal. gigoro. mogal. gielocheon. samagoy. (2) haphiles. pamphilos. sicragalmon. laupda. iothim. haiual. hailos. halua. geneuogal. samanlay. tacayhelthamyel. secalmana. (3) hesemolas. hesomelaht. gethasam. cethalsam. scilmon. saibaiol. semalsay. crathon. hanaguil. pancomnegos. tyngeny. hamissitoy. (4) sebarnay. hassimilop. thenaly. soday. henaly. halaco. meahil. crihicos. sepha. caphaual. hazaron. cezamahal. haila. saramnay. gelior. synoy. bariachacha. (5) gehemyzai. iecrafagon. legelyme. hathamathay. senac. gromyhazay. sothal. magaal. iemazay. zehemphagon. hasihezamay. legelime. hacama. ieizobol. (6) ierozabal. symaliel. seymaly. seihel. leosamaht. gemyhacal. halabre. cyhophagros. Theos. phabos. ycolmazai. negen. (7) pharameht. nehihahon. sehon. gethorem. nehehom. helisemaht. saratihai. ierafiai. hynaliha. sememanos. gezamai. iecremai. (8) passamaht. thagail. hagamal. fagamesy. fagamesym. themegoman. zemegamary. salamatha. salomothono. bon. lon. sepizihon. harion. usyon. semession. tegon. Amen.

26	[XXII. Oration 14.]1
Lemaht. sebanthe. helitihay. gozogam. romasim. hegetti. gozimal. exiophiam. sorathim. salathaam. besapha. saphiez. haculam. samiht. senaiho. phethaloym. harissim. genges. lethos. Amen. 
27	[XXIII. Oration 15.]1
Lameht. lenat. lemahat. semaht. selmahat. helmay. helymam. helmamy. zezetta. zezegta. gezegatha. zozogam. remasym. themaremasym. ieranyhel. phuerezo. gamyhal. zecegomyhal. hezetogamyhal. (2) heziephiat. hozoperbiar. iosaithyn. iosathyn. iosany. gosamyn. salaht. salatoham. salatehen. salatambel. hen. henbem. habena. henlezepha. bosephar. thamar. sahaletromar. (3) hafartitmar. thimas. tirimar. namor. semyhot. semohit. zemyhot. semoiz. lemdihon. lemahat. phethalon. hamiht. phethalonamie. zomye. zamiht. prihiti. philei. haphyn. gergeon. gergohen. (4) ierthon. lothios. lothos. semyhot. lemahat. zemohit. lemaiho. phetalon. hamye. hamyphyn. pethio. gergion. lecton. iergohen. thothios. lectos.. Amen.
28	[XXIV. Oration 16.1]
O God, the most high, invisible God. Theos. Patir. behemnos. lehernnyos. behenny. We ask you, Ymos, through your most holy angels, who are Michael, i.e. the medicine of God, Raphael, the Strength of God, Gabriel, burning, (2) and Seraphim: helipha. massay. Cherubim: ielomynctos. gadabany. zedabanay. gederanay. saramany. lomtety. loctosy. gerohanathon. zahamany. lomyht. gedanabasy. setemanay. seremanay. henlothant. helomyht. henboramyht. samanazay. gedebaudi. (3) [From] the fullness of the knowledge, we humbly as you cherubim and seraphim, and you, O Jesus Christ, through all your saints and glorious [arch]angels, the names of which are consecrated by God, which must not be spoken by us, which are these: (4) Deihel. Dehel. Depymo. Dein. Hel. Exluso. Depymon. Helynon. Exmogon. Parineos. Exmegan. Pheleneos. Nauagen. Hosyel. Dragon. Garbona. Rathion. Monyham. Megonhamos. 
29	[XXV.]
I beseech thee, O my Lord, lighten and purge my soul and my conscience with the brightness of thy light. Illumine and confirme my understanding with the odor of the sweetness of thy Holy Spirit.
(Here recite the petition, if for the vision of the Deity, say as follows.) that I may obtain to see the glorious vision which now I desire to see. Garnish my soul, O Lord, that I may see thy face and hear thy glory and praise. Reform my heart, O Lord, and renew my senses, and give me a good memory to behold the blessed vision of thy face. Temper most gentle Lord both my soul and tongue to have that glorious vision by thy glorious and ineffable names, thou which art the fountain and beginning of all goodness and godliness. Suffer me, O Lord, and give me grace and a good memory, that I may obtain the blessed vision which I have desired of thee in this godly prayer. (Here repeat the beginning).
Thou, Lord, which dost not by and by condemn the sinner but through the mercy dost abide his repentance, I, unworthy sinner, do beseech thee, O Lord, that thou wilt wipe away all my sins and wickedness, and utterly quench in me all instigations. (Here recite the petition, if for the vision of the Deity, say as follows.) that I may be made meet, O Lord, through this petition to obtain the sight of thy divine majesty by the virtue and power of thy holy angels and archangels of whom I spake before, through thy glorious majesty, thou which art one almighty and everlasting God, to whom be praise and honor forever. Amen. 

30	[XXVI.] Oration 17.
O Jesus, the son of the incomprehensible God,hancor. hanacor. hanylos. iehorna. theodonos. helyothos. heliotheos. phagor. corphandonos. norizaue. corithico. hanosae. helsezope. phagora.
31	[XXVII.] Oration.
Eleminator. candones. helos. helee. resphaga. thephagayn. thetendyn. thahonos. Ulcemya. heortahonos. uelos. behebos. belhores. hacaphagan. belehothol. ortophagon. corphandonos. born in the shape of a man for us sinners, and you holy angels Heliothos. phagnora [sacred angels] teach me and govern me. (Here recite your petition -- if for the Divine vision, say as follows:) that I may come to obtain the vision of the Deity through the glorious and most gentle and most almighty creator, our living Lord, holy, infinite, godly, and everlasting, to whom be praise, honor, and glory, world without end. Amen. 
32	[XXVIII.] Oration [18].1
Lameht. ragua. ragahel. ragia. ragiomab. hagnaht. hoguolam. exactodan. heractodam. hanthonomos. hethaeneho. hemones. iothe. lothensezaiha. sazaratha. hensazatha. serail. marab. mynathil. marathal. mairathal. brihamocon. thahamathon. leprodoz. lephoris. leprohoc. lephorijs. hesacro: hesacohen. corquenal. choremal. guoyemal. ualiaiol. salail. salaiz. salaior. halaiz. salquihel. gessidomy. gesseuazi. iessonay. hazoroz. hazarob. tharahal. bostihal. hamol. hamalamyn. Amen. 
33	[XXIX. Oration 19.]1
Semeht. seghehalt. raguaht. reloymal. haguliaz. exhator. hanthomos. lezen. saccail. marab. brihamathon. lephez. hiefacto. themay. salaihel. agessomay. arathotamal. 
34	[XXX. Oration.]
O incommutable God, which in memory art irreprehensible, whose wisdom cannot be spoken against the angel of the everlasting council, may this day embrace my heart in his right hand, and may fill my conscience with the remembrance of thee, and the odor of thy ointments, and the sweetness of thy grace may furnish my mind with the brightness and clearness of thy Holy Spirit, with the which thy angels, O Lord with all the powers of heaven do desire to behold thy face everlastingly (Here recite your petition -- if for the vision of the Deity, say as follows:) that I may with them, most merciful Lord, behold the face, thou which with thy wisdom hast repaired all things with thy everlasting bliss, whereunto thou hast restored the angels by man which was fallen, whom through thy love thou hast drawn again with thy glory, and didst vouchsafe to instrue Adam with all knowledge, inform, replenish, instrue, restore, correct, clarify, and refresh me, that I may be a new man, to understand thy commandments. (Here recite your petition -- if for the vision of the Deity, say as follows:) that I may obtain the blessed sight of thee, to the health of my soul and body, and all faithful people, to the honor and glory of thy name, which is blessed forever. Amen. 
35	[XXXI. Oration 20.]
Hazaram. hihel. hehelilem. hethelilem. *theiihem. hazagatha. *agruazcor. hizguor. *liaiah. *isenesan. zezor. iesar. ysail. and you holy angels whose names are written in the Book of Life, and there be rehearsed (i.e. recited): , iasym. horos. helsa. heremogos. myrecagil. resaym. lemay. lemar. rasamen. lemar. themamoht. irasim. iemamoht. themamoht. secray. sotthaht. sehan. *hanamar. *thau. *sechay. helymaht. iosoihel. helymoht. *sattamaht. helymyhot. iosey. theodony. iasamaht. pharene. panetheneos. phateneynehos. haramen. Theos. hathanaym. hanataiphar. hatanazar. basiactor. *ieseuemay. iesamana. iesamanay. haziactor. hamynosia. zezamanay. hamos. hamynos. hiatregilos. cahegilihos. zaguhel. zatahel. <Amen.>
36	[XXXII. Oration 21.]
Hielma. helma. *helimat. *heuina. hytanathas. hemyna. hitanathois. helsa. hebos. hiebros. helda. hagasa. hoccomegos. raitotagum. coictagon. myheragyn.<Amen.>
37	[XXXIII. Oratio 22.]
Confirm, strengthen, and illumine, abba + theos + behetimyhat + hehem + ruhos + bethar + *husuruhunt + hetarius + theos + God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost, my prayer. [O] God, confirm my understanding and my soul, and my memory. (Here recite the petition; if for the [vision of the] Deity, say as follows:)to receive, know, see, and behold the sight of Thee, and thy blessed and glorious face. Amen. 
38	[XXXIV.] Oration 23.
Agloros. theomythos. themyros. sehocodothos. zehocodos. hattihamel. sozena. haptamygel. sozihenzia. hemya. gettahol. helyna. sothoneya. geherahel. halimyz. zezoray. gezetiz. gerehona. hazihal. hazai. *meguos. megalos. usyon. *saduhc. <Amen.>
[O God of all, you who are my God, who in the beginning created all out of nothing, who in your Spirit has transformed all, fill, restore, and cure my comprehension, that I may glorify you through all my thoughts, words, and deeds.]1
39	[XXXV.] Oration [24].
Megal. agal. iegal. hariothos. handos. [hanathos.] hanathoios. *hauothos. lemazai. semezai. lamezai. lethonas. iethonay. zemazphar. *zeomaspar. zeomaphar. tetragramos. thethagranys. hatammar. hazaamahar. zahamyr. iechosaphor. zethesaphir. gethor. saphor. hasagitha. hasacapha. hasamypa. haragaia. hazaguy. phasamar. samar. saleht. salym. salmeht. sameht. saloht. sillezaleht. sadayne. neothatir. neodamy. hadozamyr. zozena. belymoht. hazat. helyhot.
40	[XXXVI] Oration1
O the truth, the way, and the life of all creatures, O righteous God, quicken me, and visit me, and my understanding, clarify my soul and purge it (recite the petition, if for the [vision of the] Deity, say as follows:) that like as thou didst shew unto John and Paul the sight of thee when thou didst take them up into heaven, even so, Lord, that I may while this my body liveth see and behold thy face. Amen.
41	[XXXVII]1
Hamycchiahel. hamsahel. dalihir. hair. halel. zedach. hazarach. zedaizh. hazaias. lezorihal. zezorias. iechori. alsemaia. ysamyha. zama. ysa. samma. ysarai. ysameht. ysathay. lemyhel. nehel. semehel. iemymehel. mythynab. nybahal. mychyn. mybancaiab. hamyly. mynab. heliasal. hometibymal. helymal. hymbos. zebracal. zelimal. iechro. samaril. zezocha. iecrosahal. melos. zalimebor. zalymylos. zaguhel. mychathomos. myheromos. mycracosmos. nycromyhos. Amen.
42	[XXXVIII]
I, wretched sinner in thy sight, O Lord my God, to whose sight all things are open and manifest, in whose hand all things are clean and pure, purge and cleanse me, O almighty God. These things do I speak that the error of infidelity and the filthiness of sin being taken away, the good Holy Spirit may help me and quicken me as it doth quicken all things, and put away all mine incredulity and filthiness, (Recite the petition. If for the vision of God, say as follows:) that I, though I be unworthy, through thy mercy, without [fail] let me obtain to see thy most glorious face. Amen. 
43	[XXXIX]
Semoth + gehel + helymoht + hemeb + sabahel + zerothay + zabahel + gerozay + hebel + crosaihamagra + hatchagra + ragen + seromay + zehez + hezehengon + iezomay + hemehegon + hamagrata + cezozoy + gesommay + hesehengnon + lethomay + halla + hathanaton + hagigel + hatamyhel + hathomas + hecohay + zemohay + theageta + theal + regon + hagem + iezeragal + zehalragem + geht + zeregal + hamabihat + hezegon + gethage + madiaaios + zadanchios + exhedon + pallathoros + zallachatos + thelthis + trehodios + zezochthiam + pallititacos + nethi + delthis + heremodios + helmelazar + helyne + zazar + haron + gezero + mymyhel + henthon + hermelazar + sython + genithon + hezdmyel + heymemy + helmelazar + cremymyhel + exheruz + zorol + mothora + rabihel + samyb + lamely + melion + sarabihel + samyl + tamyl + samyhel. Amen. 
44	[XL.]1
Almighty and everlastinge God, most merciful father, which art blessed forever which hast given unto us, O eternall and irreprehensible God, a healthful and incommutable remedy, which for the almightiness of thy majesty hast given us leave to praise and glorify thee, and hast granted unto us to see thy glorious majesty, the which is to other creatures denied, whose determination can in no wise be altered, whose nature is eternal and of divine substance, with the holy Trinity which is the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, which is exalted above all heavens, where the godhead and the Deity doth abide. x. I beseech thy majesty O Lord, and glorify thy almighty power and the marvels, the highest and everlasting power, I most lamentably beseech thee O my God which art the inestimable wisdom and the ineffable life of angels, the incomprehensible God, in whose sight do stand the multitude of angels. (Here recite your petition. If for the divine vision, say as follows.) that thou wilt forthwith grant me thy holy vision, and that thou wilt help me and give me health that I may see the clearness of thy vision, and grant me thy pure understanding and perseverance in thy laws that I may be worthy to see thy face which livest and reignest eternally in the sight of all celestial powers, now and ever and everywhere, world without end. Amen.
45	[XLI.]1
Semoht + lamen + lezahel + salmatihal + zamatihel + mahazihel + zamazihal + ezeleaz + mahatihoten + helzoleam + megos + hemol + hemnoleha + methos + hazamegos + halzamyhol + alzamoy + menmanittos + memomittos + zely + marayhathol + zolmazathol + zemeney + iemenay + lameley + zethemalo + zathenaran + labdaio + lodeho + zabday + hoton + ladaiedon + lapdaihadon + lothanan + hizemazihe + izthamhihe + iotha + uahuzuzif + zihanatihephomos + zeherem + zehe + ziehelmos + hiehanathihe + homos + zeherem + hessimathal + hessicomal + on + chehe + sihotil + magal + hesiothil + mycho + halpha + husale + ouus + flum + fals + hallemassay + alesemonoy + salemanasai + helemasay + zazaico + semanay + nachairo + natham + gemehol + yetulmassay + gemahol + iezemalo + magul + gehamas + senadar + iezema + salpha + secramagay + iehennagay + zehetyn + zemadazan + iehir + ramagay + geiama + salpha + gemama + suphu + ioher + iohabos + haymal + hamanal + thanoctomas + iobohe + hamynal + zanogromos + nyzozoroba + nygerozoma + negero + rabali + negora + hohalym + nytheromathum + tho + lymchay + tolomay + loynar + tholinngay + zenolozihon + hisonomelihon + samyhel + giethy + sicrozegamal + thoneos + carmolehos + samhel + geiszefihor + iezolnohit + phicrose + gramaht + theonthos + carmelos + lamyhel + larmanail + gesezihor + semarnail + zaarmatihail + heliozo + thahel + semail.Amen.

46	[XLII. First Terminus]1
Genealogon + reealologon + tenealogo + saphay + zazaiham + saphia + zede + zemoziham + zomonrihel + sanaman + samna + gegnognal + samyhel + Ieremyhel + horaciotos + hetha + siothos + sepharaym + henemos + genozabal + Ieremabal + hethemel + genotheram + genorabal + semyha + senma + mynaron + yninathon + geristel + hymacton + chalos + phabal + resaram + marachihel + naratheos + ietrinantho + Iezibathel + sephoros + thesirara + zepharonay + hazana + messihel + sother + hazihel + semicros + chiel + hamacal + hator + zemothor + sanaday + morothochiel + semenos + satabis + themay + horel + renay + zenel + hasa + gemol + zemelaza + Iemozihel + zemei + zemeihaton + zechor + helycos + semysemie + hiacon + iethor + mehohin + hazenethon + semale + mepathon + zemolym + sistos + eloy + semegey + manos + helypos + hemyclopos + geys + seray + sephet + sephamanay + helihothos + cherobalym + hassenethon + hisistos + domengos + Iemyrohal + samanathos + semeham + behenos + megon + hanythel + iechomeros + Ielamagar + remelthet + genay + domathamos + hathamyr + seryhon + senon + zaralamay + sabayhon. Amen.
47	[XLIII. Second Terminus.]1
Geolym + hazenethon + ysistos + eloy + sephei + manay + helyhotas + Ierobalym + semalet + gonay + heliothos + domathamos + hathamyr + seryhon + hamynyr + senoz + magamagol + sethar + senam + magel + hel + helymothos + helseron + zeron + phamal + Iegromos + herymyhothon + lanthamos + heramathon + landamos + lanaymos + seplatihel + sephatihel + hagenalis + legenale + hegernar + stanazihel + stanithel + hathanathos + hegrogebal + rogor + heremynar + henecyman + marothon + ietharnaym + henozios + Iezeduhos + gezconos + satam + gortaray + helycychcym + helestymeym + sephalzna + mathar + saphar + manatham + bezezay + samay + sephay + syhemathon + balair + samamar + hamyhel + marmamor + henemos + gegohomos + samar + sabar + hamihel + gezamahel + sacramay + iezamamel + hamansamel + hamazamoly + geromol + lezemon + sycromal + iezabal + sanma + zama + hatanathos + theos + helyhene + zelym + helyhem + hezelym + cromemon + henethemos + gegehuol + hemthemos + iamam + harathinam + megon + megnoncemon + scrymay + hethemel + hemel + sethor + helsethor + sophornay + behelthor + sesalihel + tanahel + homyhal + Iezahel + zemahel + homal + guomagnos + sennyr + iechor + nomemal + gehangno + genayr + iecorname + malihagnathos + hachamol + iecromagnos + magnarht + noynemal + hagnathos + hamathalis + iecoragnos + sammazihel + ieconail + hesuogem + chotorim + mynamtanamaytha + thanaym + raymara + senayhel + honmon + genthon + lanamyhel + gehemgnor + gemyhothar + iamnamyhel + sezihel + magol + samanay + haganal + menya + ferimay + sarranay + lanamyhel + gnohemgnor + gemonthar + lammyhel + sezihel + magnol + samanay + hagamal + mena + ferimay + sarranay + lacham + lyhares + lethanagihel + nathes + samairliazer + egihel + thamazihel + hacacaros + cazaihel + hacaraz + hacatoharona + semyday + hacca + choharon + semelay + iamye + iazabal + lauerecabal + iammeze + thabal + cumachoros + hacoronathos + sathanael + hariham + zathhar + harathar + haziler + zechar + hazihem + hazathar + loenigemar + hazanathar + hamegnar + semal + gehen + negemar + hemegnol + semam + hathamanos + latimairos + rechihamos + hamognal + semar + temnalamos + sebranay + selamnay + baructhata + ialon + hespnhos + ramel + semal + renylsemar + ielamacrom + ielama + crymyzaiber + segher + sayher + ierolognos + iegemagnolon + geiemamagnosam + hamynos + iamozia + iozihon + iacuhosia + hagnyhosio + yecologos + hazeoyon + hamynos + hamyr + matharihon + mathanon + senos + heliothon + zenos + semear + lanar + lamar + setronalon + gemal + secromagnol + secromehal + lamagil + sethoham + sechoiro + maihol + socromagnol + genos + thomegen + nycheos.
48	[XLIV. Third Terminus.]1
Agenos + theomogenos + theos + hatanathos + kirihel + ypolis + ypile + karihel + cristopholis + hon + ymalihor + ymas + harethena + chenathon + leonbon + boho + usyon + ieromegnos + hagenoy + hysichon + geromagol + hagyhamal + latham + zarchamal + senar + peconahal + lacramagral + sehar + sehan + iezetom + genomoloy + genomos + iezoro + nomeros + henahihel + gemehagate + gemyha + iethenmahos + myhayhos + semana + hahel + semahel + hoteihos + hatazaihos + saphar + nemenomos + hoheihos + hataz + ayhos + caphar + nemenomos + horihos + hataz + haihos + seiha + chomo + chomothanay + lamam + lamnamyr + lamyhar + lamanazamyr + lemyar + hagramos + generamoseht + senyha + exagal + hamagron + semaharon + semyr + harauma + mamail + haramcha + mothana + ramay + iose + ramaht + hanaramay + iole + Christus + hamyristos + hamirrios + tharathos + caratheos + saleht + semamarim + iasol + salem + semyhamaym + hallehuma + haristeiz + bohem + ruhos + halla + samyey + syloht + samyhel + hallenomay + samychi + methonomos + iethonomos + gedonomay.
49	[XLV. Fourth Terminus.]1
Genathores + sanamathotos + gnanatores + zanothoros + genomos + ienazar + seuma + marathos + senather + sematheher + senachar + gerub + iamam + exihel + chublalaman + hesihel + sethei + semylihel + zomyhel + genocomel + thanyham + machar + hachay + hazanathay + theos + hamanatar + hazanethar + theconay + chiathar + theohon + namacar + senuales + samyha + hesaca + semaly + hesamen + semyhahes + sarcihate + nazihatel + hanaziathachel + hasilihacel + pamylihel + haziliatel + hagenoron + hagenorem + hagenorozom + samaht + samoht + habisumaht + hendon + habysanahat + tyngehen + cragohen + hazamgeri + hazamaguhem + lemehot + hasomgeri + iomoyhot + semiha + riahacton + semymarithaton + semynar + zihoton + zagnam + horay + honethe + hoparathos + nahamala + rochos + hazata + helralacos + horetha + horalacos + horetha + horalothos + haralo + lethos + geno + zabahal + lemaht + hazocha + lematalmay + halmay + iemalis + secomathal + harmarlemaht + sethemaesal + rabasadail + semnazliel + lethom + hagihal + legos + patis + iethomagihal + genomythos + samayhas + ienemeros + samma + zasamar + hazamyha + hasaymam + thagnoro + bandethepharon + thagromathon + landothes + pharen + decarpe + medyhos + decapochen + duhomelathus + decaponde + dihamelathos + semyhariht + samyhan + genathely + zazamar + myremoht + satharios + gemiliam + sacrehos + saphorenam + saphoro + megon + hassahamynel + hazaa + myrahel + gerizo + ieristosymythos + hothos + hymicros + otheos.
50	[XLVI. Fifth Terminus.1]
Semathy + motheham + semathyotheos + hesapopa + hesaphopanos + gramyhel + garamanas + saphomoron + gelbaray + ieblaray + hetidiham + henzan + hezidiham + canazpharis + hanthesion + canastphasis + holithos + hosschihon + samatihel + ramaihel + semiramoht + sathanos + gecabal + hostosion + lemeliham + saphara + negon + zaramyhel + zamyrel + geriston + zymphoros + hocho + hadalomob + nagem + nagenay + megos + naymogos + semazihar + helaph + herlo + holopherno + lopheo + hornobahoceo + nydeht + herihegil + rognhon + nydocricib + negal + neguabel + memoht + hemel + gemoht + sagnanar + clarapalos + zenozmyhel + iosagat + genoz + hamel + guara + maziel + guaramaziel + gerathar + sathamyanos + sahamuham + guamazihel + machelaglilos + geraguaht + sathamyham + huriel + phalomagos + phalomgros + iotho + megon + saraht + saaysac + horamylichos + carmelichos + hezaladuha + hezeladam + hisihel + hemal + usyon + lamal + raguam + sablathom + sabsacom.
51	[XLVII. Sixth Terminus.]1
Serognegnos + geronehos + samanachor + sazanachoray + zamachoray + sanatihel + lamathios + sanazihel + thamyquiol + zazarahel + kyrion + zamynel + kyris + crememon + caristomnon + sacronomay + soromono + hestimpandos + ietham + panydos + methalamathon + merasamaty + sabarna + heluhama + guathamal + hemdamyhos + thega + myhabal + teguamathal + chathanathel + thehogethos + cehognos + sanazihel + cathanathel + tehogethos + tehognos + canazay + teneloihos + zenelyhos + cathaliel + theomeguos + lapdamylon + landamelyhon + ierothihon + lapda + mozihon + homen + samal + samochia + homy + samal + samaziho + sathamenay + samohaia + sathomonay + geromazihel + hoccho + macalon + hothomegalon + genetazamanay + hazatamel + hazabanas + iechro + tynognale + sehor + gehoraia + haramanay + harathacihel + hazabamoht + hamython + lapdas + hazathan + thihel + hazabanos + hamacon + hamamalyhon + samalyhon + samalerihon + usiologihon + legyn + heleis + hymon + machitilon + theos + heloty + sarramazili + samachili + helamon + chihamon + hel + lamochiamon + lagay + lemechiel + semezihel + laymos + lanos + hazamathon + themohan + thanathon + theon + natharathon.
52	[XLVIII. Seventh Terminus.]1
Magnus + magnol + nazihacol + nazihathos + heliam + mathon + saphar + nazachon + gemehihel + iomorihel + sanayhel + sazanyhel + saramel + semyhel + sezimel + lebachon + iarachon + iaratham + basihas + lamnay + ronala + mathathon + rasihos + layna + choro + laymatham + labynegual + scomycros + bazihos + lamna + labnnegas + herezemyhel + pheamicros + negemezihol + relmalaguoram + hanamyhos + hanomos + gracosihos + gracomessihos + sothiron + genozepha + chelahel + zopascanelios + zepasconomos + hamarizihos + zenazihel + geramathihel + gecramathihol + hasaguar + hasagiri + paramyhot + hapasiry + haranamar + senales + hasagnanamar + semagel + secastologihon + genagnolos + hagenolo + thegos + sozor + hamay + seroguomay + sorosamay + iamaramos + remolithos + lammaramos + zenon + serolen + zabay + peripaton + harihat + hananyhos + crastrosihos + graguomoysihos + sichiron + genozem pha + zehahel + sephastaneos + hamaristigos + senazihel + geramacihel + pazamyhol + haphasy + zihazanagar + senasel + secasehogyhon + genaguolos + hegonele + thegos + sorozamay + sozor + hamay + iamaramos + zelihon + iezolen.
53	[XLIX. Eighth Terminus.]1
Remolithos + ypomehiles + hazimelos + samal + hazaramagos + gelomyhel + gezeno + megual + hanacristos + hanaipos + gemotheon + samahot + helihemon + hialamum + salamyhym + haminos + gezelihos + sartharay + sarthamy + gechora + maray + gethoramy + ieguoram + myhamy + theos + agios + crehamnos + yskyros + athanathos + probihos + meguon + hacazamazay + hecohy + uryhel + iebozihel + sarib + rogay + halomora + sarahihel + hechamazihel + sezamagua + iechar. 
